cog_funcs_are_functional.md, before:

# Cognitive Functions Are Functional

In this essay I would like to examine the structure of Cognitive Functions. Cognitive Functions, first formulated by Carl Jung. In particular, I would like to clarify the relationship between Judging Functions, and Perceiving Functions. In so doing we should be able to see the inner workings of what makes up a Judging Function and a Perceiving Function. Cognitive Functions are not just categories that allow us to see the patterns within the world. They have a particular relationship to each other, and understanding that relationship allows us to appreciate what they actually do for us.

Cognitive Functions have an important word in their name: function. Cognitive Functions are functional. They behave like functions. What is a function? Let's go back to our basic math:

    y = f (x)

A function takes a value and returns a value. If I were to put that sort of annotation into terms those familiar with Cognitive Functions would understand, it would be something like:

    y = Ti(x)

    y = Fi(x)

    y = Te(x)

    y = Fe(x)

For now we are going to start by examining the Judging Functions. There is still some translation to do here, because even though we've replaced "f," we are still not sure what stand in place of x and y. We are missing the Perceiving Function part of the story.

## Judging Functions Receive Perceptions As Arguments

What would the x be, for a Judging Function? I would like to argue that the value x can be filled by any perception. Let's try an example:

    x = The sky is blue

    y = Te("The sky is blue")

Judging Functions take the raw data of our perceptions and transform it into knowledge. Extraverted Thinking (Te) will take our perception "The sky is blue" and convert it into knowledge that can be stored as an experience.

## Judging Functions Produce Perceptions As Results

If Judging Functions produce knowledge, we still need to define what kind of knowledge a Judging Function produces. We still have y to deal with. I would like to argue that the value y can also be filled by any perception:

    "The sky is blue, is true" = Te("The sky is blue")

Here, Extroverted Thinking (Te), has compared the statement "The sky is blue" with what it sees in the real world, and judges that the statement is true. This new proposition also counts as a perception, that can be stored and retrieved for later use.

So, as we can see, a Judging Function, like a mathematical function, can receive any value and produce any value.

## Perceiving Functions Generate And Filter Perceptions

Perceiving Functions produce the raw data and the stored data that our mind receives. But Perceiving Functions also have an added function: they filter the infinite amount of raw data our mind to find the most relevant information to us.

    y = Si(x)

    y = Ni(x)

    y = Se(x)

    y = Ne(x)

Here, "x" stands as any sensory perception we might receive within our mind. Our Perceiving Functions will either allow it to pass through to our Judging Functions, or filter it out. Our mind cannot be allowed to get too noisy with unnecessary information, so our Perceiving Functions help us pay attention that that which is most relevant. An example:

    x = "A dog is barking"

    y = Se("A dog is barking")

Here, Extraverted Sensing receives the raw data from the ear that a dog is barking. Now, depending on how strong Extraverted Sensing is in one's stack, the mind might receive this perception, or it might not might. Not everything we perceive comes to our attention. So we might get it:

    x = "A dog is barking"

    "A dog is barking" = Se("A dog is barking")

Or we might not:

    x = "A dog is barking"

    ∅ = Se("A dog is barking")

∅ is a symbol for the null, or empty set, means we would receive no data from our Perceiving Function. This helps explain the machinery of Perceiving Functions and how they act like filters. If the data never comes to our attention, it won't be consciously considered as part of the map that we make of the world.


## Judging Functions Can Take Multiple Arguments

In our first example, we illustrated the functional structure of the Judging Functions by passing a single unknown, x. But Judging Functions, in order to be effective, need to be able to receive data from multiple sources.

    y = Ti(Si, Ni, Ne)

    y = Fi(Si, Ni, Ne)

    y = Te(Si, Ni, Se)

    y = Fe(Si, Ni, Se)

Our memories and experiences (Si), the rules and abstractions we have gleaned from those experiences (Ni), the new information we are actively receiving from our five senses (Se), and the new information we are actively receiving from our imaginations (Ne), can all be used to make a proper judgement and generate a new perception, "y."

    y = Te("The sky was blue yesterday" (Si),

    "The sky is blue for everyone" (Ni),

    "That looks like blue to me" (Se))

Our Judging Functions can take multiple values in as data to help us make the best decisions, to help us make the most accurate representations of the world.

Commit message:

Add nice Kant quote on function definition.

cog_funcs_are_functional.md, after:

# Cognitive Functions Are Functional

> By the word function I understand the unity of the act of arranging diverse representations under one common representation. Immanuel Kant

In this essay I would like to examine the structure of Cognitive Functions. Cognitive Functions, first formulated by Carl Jung. In particular, I would like to clarify the relationship between Judging Functions, and Perceiving Functions. In so doing we should be able to see the inner workings of what makes up a Judging Function and a Perceiving Function. Cognitive Functions are not just categories that allow us to see the patterns within the world. They have a particular relationship to each other, and understanding that relationship allows us to appreciate what they actually do for us.

Cognitive Functions have an important word in their name: function. Cognitive Functions are functional. They behave like functions. What is a function? Let's go back to our basic math:

    y = f (x)

A function takes a value and returns a value. If I were to put that sort of annotation into terms those familiar with Cognitive Functions would understand, it would be something like:

    y = Ti(x)

    y = Fi(x)

    y = Te(x)

    y = Fe(x)

For now we are going to start by examining the Judging Functions. There is still some translation to do here, because even though we've replaced "f," we are still not sure what stand in place of x and y. We are missing the Perceiving Function part of the story.

## Judging Functions Receive Perceptions As Arguments

What would the x be, for a Judging Function? I would like to argue that the value x can be filled by any perception. Let's try an example:

    x = The sky is blue

    y = Te("The sky is blue")

Judging Functions take the raw data of our perceptions and transform it into knowledge. Extraverted Thinking (Te) will take our perception "The sky is blue" and convert it into knowledge that can be stored as an experience.

## Judging Functions Produce Perceptions As Results

If Judging Functions produce knowledge, we still need to define what kind of knowledge a Judging Function produces. We still have y to deal with. I would like to argue that the value y can also be filled by any perception:

    "The sky is blue, is true" = Te("The sky is blue")

Here, Extroverted Thinking (Te), has compared the statement "The sky is blue" with what it sees in the real world, and judges that the statement is true. This new proposition also counts as a perception, that can be stored and retrieved for later use.

So, as we can see, a Judging Function, like a mathematical function, can receive any value and produce any value.

## Perceiving Functions Generate And Filter Perceptions

Perceiving Functions produce the raw data and the stored data that our mind receives. But Perceiving Functions also have an added function: they filter the infinite amount of raw data our mind to find the most relevant information to us.

    y = Si(x)

    y = Ni(x)

    y = Se(x)

    y = Ne(x)

Here, "x" stands as any sensory perception we might receive within our mind. Our Perceiving Functions will either allow it to pass through to our Judging Functions, or filter it out. Our mind cannot be allowed to get too noisy with unnecessary information, so our Perceiving Functions help us pay attention that that which is most relevant. An example:

    x = "A dog is barking"

    y = Se("A dog is barking")

Here, Extraverted Sensing receives the raw data from the ear that a dog is barking. Now, depending on how strong Extraverted Sensing is in one's stack, the mind might receive this perception, or it might not might. Not everything we perceive comes to our attention. So we might get it:

    x = "A dog is barking"

    "A dog is barking" = Se("A dog is barking")

Or we might not:

    x = "A dog is barking"

    ∅ = Se("A dog is barking")

∅ is a symbol for the null, or empty set, means we would receive no data from our Perceiving Function. This helps explain the machinery of Perceiving Functions and how they act like filters. If the data never comes to our attention, it won't be consciously considered as part of the map that we make of the world.


## Judging Functions Can Take Multiple Arguments

In our first example, we illustrated the functional structure of the Judging Functions by passing a single unknown, x. But Judging Functions, in order to be effective, need to be able to receive data from multiple sources.

    y = Ti(Si, Ni, Ne)

    y = Fi(Si, Ni, Ne)

    y = Te(Si, Ni, Se)

    y = Fe(Si, Ni, Se)

Our memories and experiences (Si), the rules and abstractions we have gleaned from those experiences (Ni), the new information we are actively receiving from our five senses (Se), and the new information we are actively receiving from our imaginations (Ne), can all be used to make a proper judgement and generate a new perception, "y."

    y = Te("The sky was blue yesterday" (Si),

    "The sky is blue for everyone" (Ni),

    "That looks like blue to me" (Se))

Our Judging Functions can take multiple values in as data to help us make the best decisions, to help us make the most accurate representations of the world.
