hegel_logic.md, before:

# Hegel's Logic: Two Moves from Being to Becoming

Recently, I finished reading Stephen Houlgate's _The Opening of Hegel's Logic_. After reading it, my understanding of Hegel's project in the Logic is to derive categories that we use, starting with the least-defined, moving towards the most-defined. I would like to run through the two basic logical operations that Hegel uses to derive each category. Once he has established his preliminary definition of Being, he only uses these two logical operations.

## Hegel's Logical Chess

From what I've gathered, after reading Stephen Houlgate's book, is that Hegel only uses two moves in the Logic. It's like Hegel has challenged himself to a game of Logical Chess and it has a weird chessboard and there are only two pieces. Hegel's first piece is that of the Negater. When it moves to an opponent's piece it negates that piece. If it were chess, it would turn a pawn into a king, or a rook into a bishop. Hegel's second Logical Chess piece is the Observer. It takestwo pieces and observes the connection between the two, creating a third.

## The First Move: From Being to Nothing

Hegel starts with his most definition of Being: "indeterminate immediacy." Hegel attempts to start with the most basic of concepts, and make the smallest logical move possible to build up more complicated ideas. That smallest logical move possible is that of negation. Negation is the simplest logical operation. It takes a single something, and returns the opposite of that something. It's the simplest because all other logical operations require more than one something. For instance, in mathematics, the addition operation requires two operands. In constrast, negation only requires a single operand.

Therefore, since we have a single operand that Hegel has given us (Being), and we have an operation that only requires one operand (negation), we can execute the first move in Hegel's logic. The negation of Being, is Nothing. What's the opposite of being other than nothing? It seems almost obvious.

## The Second Move: From Being and Nothing to Becoming

The first move was that of negation. Now that we have two ideas, Being and Nothing, we need to do something else, and that second move is observing. We need to observe the logical relationship between Being and Nothing. Hegel has already defined Being as indeterminate immediacy. And yet Nothing, even though it is the negation of Being, also has this same structural definition, or lack thereof. The Nothing is also indeterminate immediacy.

Because Being and Nothing have identical structures, even though we know they are different ideas, logically they bleed into one another, because they are equally indeterminate and equally immediate. Our mind's eye tries to hold onto Being, but it is led to Nothing. If we try to focus on Nothing, we are led to ponder Being. Logically, it creates a shimmering effect, as Stephen Houlgate says, or a flickering. By observing Being and Nothing, we have observed a flickering instability in its relationship, and that instability leads us to another concept: Becoming. Becoming is that shimmering, that flickering, that unsettled, ever-changing flux.

Commit message:

Further telling of the reason behind reading Hegel.

hegel_logic.md, after:

# Hegel's Logic: Two Moves from Being to Becoming

Recently, I finished reading Stephen Houlgate's _The Opening of Hegel's Logic_. I had decided to read it after reading Immanuel Kant's _Critique of Pure Reason_ two years ago and Soren Kierkegaard's _Concluding Unscientific Postscript_. Hegel is the major philosopher sandwhiched in time between the towering genius of Kant and the incisive critique of Kierkegaard. Primarily, Kierkegaard's criticism of systems is aimed at Hegel.

However, the primary reason I decided to learn about Hegel was his project around categories in the Logic. For Kant, categories are extremely important to his own project, but Kant assumes them, and does not try to prove or derive or substantiate the categories themselves. Hegel attempts to do just that.

And so, after reading Houlgate's book on the Logic, my understanding of Hegel's project in the Logic is to derive categories that we use, starting with the least-defined, moving towards the most-defined. I would like to run through the two basic logical operations that Hegel uses to derive each category. Once he has established his preliminary definition of Being, he only uses these two logical operations.

## Hegel's Logical Chess

From what I've gathered, after reading Stephen Houlgate's book, is that Hegel only uses two moves in the Logic. It's like Hegel has challenged himself to a game of Logical Chess and it has a weird chessboard and there are only two pieces. Hegel's first piece is that of the Negater. When it moves to an opponent's piece it negates that piece. If it were chess, it would turn a pawn into a king, or a rook into a bishop. Hegel's second Logical Chess piece is the Observer. It takestwo pieces and observes the connection between the two, creating a third.

## The First Move: From Being to Nothing

Hegel starts with his most definition of Being: "indeterminate immediacy." Hegel attempts to start with the most basic of concepts, and make the smallest logical move possible to build up more complicated ideas. That smallest logical move possible is that of negation. Negation is the simplest logical operation. It takes a single something, and returns the opposite of that something. It's the simplest because all other logical operations require more than one something. For instance, in mathematics, the addition operation requires two operands. In constrast, negation only requires a single operand.

Therefore, since we have a single operand that Hegel has given us (Being), and we have an operation that only requires one operand (negation), we can execute the first move in Hegel's logic. The negation of Being, is Nothing. What's the opposite of being other than nothing? It seems almost obvious.

## The Second Move: From Being and Nothing to Becoming

The first move was that of negation. Now that we have two ideas, Being and Nothing, we need to do something else, and that second move is observing. We need to observe the logical relationship between Being and Nothing. Hegel has already defined Being as indeterminate immediacy. And yet Nothing, even though it is the negation of Being, also has this same structural definition, or lack thereof. The Nothing is also indeterminate immediacy.

Because Being and Nothing have identical structures, even though we know they are different ideas, logically they bleed into one another, because they are equally indeterminate and equally immediate. Our mind's eye tries to hold onto Being, but it is led to Nothing. If we try to focus on Nothing, we are led to ponder Being. Logically, it creates a shimmering effect, as Stephen Houlgate says, or a flickering. By observing Being and Nothing, we have observed a flickering instability in its relationship, and that instability leads us to another concept: Becoming. Becoming is that shimmering, that flickering, that unsettled, ever-changing flux.
