intuition_for_programmers.md, before:

# Intuition for Programmers

## The Value of Intuition

Programming is complex. The amount of complexity we have to deal with to implement what the business wants seems simple if you look at one requirement at a time, but if you look at it all together, the complexity explodes exponentially as we try to keep everything working. It's quite the balancing act. Because of that complexity, programming requires us to be as creative as we possibly can. 

As programmers, we know that programming is an inherently creative activity. We have to be creative, in order to meet and combat the complexity that we face. We find ourselves in situations where we need to find solutions as quickly as possible, and since we are always doing new features, it's rare that we ever do something twice. The businesses that we work for need us to be doing things that haven't been done. And we have to do it within a very short timeframe. We don't have the luxury to cycle through all the possible solutions to find the best one. The business depends on us to do the best we can with not much time. We need an ability or a drive that can help us make instinctive cognitive leaps towards the solutions we need to find. I want to argue that this capability, this drive, is called intuition. 

Whether we know it or not, programmers use intuition every day. I believe it would be helpful to discuss what intuition is, because being aware of the category of intuition can help us understand when we can trust it, and when we will hit some of its limitiations. It's a very powerful force in a programmer's life, but it cannot solve all problems. That's my promise to you, that after reading this, you will better understand intuition as a tool in your programming toolbox.

## What is Intuition?

Intuition is immediately grasped knowledge. The source of this knowledge is not our eyes, or ears, or any sort of machination that we can break down and analyze. Intuition seems to skip all of that machinery and upload knowledge directly into our minds. Within the sphere of software programming, we experience it primarily as a solution to a problem that comes to us instantly and suddenly. We are stuck on a problem, we go away for a little while, or overnight, and the next thing we know, the solution comes to us, without any serious number crunching and almost, it seems, without effort. Somehow, our mind searches for a solution and appears to skip the actual execution of the search algorithm. It almost seems like we're plugged into a different reality. 

These experiences are some of the most rewarding and satisfying experiences we can have as programmers. Without occasional realizations of solutions, programming can get dull and dreary, as we have to grind on a problem. We lose our ability to think quickly and trudge along as our slower, logical mind tries to catch up by verifying the validity of our intuitions, and the consistency of our conclusions against our assumptions. For the most part, these intuitions lie outside of our direct control. But there are things we can do to allow our intuitions to more effectively help us find solutions, which leads us to an analysis of the nature of intuitions.

## The Kinds of Intuition

Carl Jung made a distinction between two kinds of intuition based on an intuition's orientation: extraverted intuitions and introverted intuitions.

### Introverted Intuition

Introverted Intuition is a further breakdown of the category of intuition. For us, as programmers, we would experience it as the abstractions that we are all familiar with, that we use everyday. The design patterns, best practices, business rules. Introverted Intuition is already-known abstractions. They are conclusions that come after years of experience and practice that have been abstracted out into wise rules for programming. In software terms, introverted intuition is previously-stored abstract data. This is the knowledge that has stood the test of time.

static, synthesized

### Extraverted Intuition

Extraverted Intuition is the power of intuition oriented towards an external world. This external world is not physical. It is the abstract stream of consciousness that plays words in your head, reminds you of embarassing things, and shows you solutions to difficult software problems.

dynamic, synthesizing


The thing about intuitions is that they are separated from the physical world. There are good things and bad things about that. But they appear to us primarily as abstractions, and so aren't as fully grounded as the facts of sensation.

While we can appreciate the immediacy of intuitions, they can affect us only indirectly. We create systems, based on these abstractions, that are able to push and pull on the physical world.




Not all intuitions are true. The intuitions that have come to us as brainstorms that have not stood the test of time fall under the category of Extraverted Intuition. The intuitions that we have found useful, that capture an abstract essence of the sensations we are considering fall under the category of Introverted Intuition.

The Sweet-Spot for Intuition



## The Limits of Intuition


### The Limits of Introverted Intuition

The danger with an over-reliance on intuition is that you won't be able to tackle new problems. By focusing on best practices and already-received solutions, new solutions won't come to the fore.

### The Limits of Extraverted Intuition

The thing about intuitions is that they're all in our head. As programmers, we are used to, and can quite enjoy, living inside our head. While intuitions have a reality about them, compared to the outside world that we can see and hear and touch, intuitions are abstractions. They symbolize things and relationships that we find in the concrete world.

One of the things that intuition cannot solve are NP-hard problems. 

Priming the Pump of Intuition


Conclusion

Commit message:

Progress on intuition for programmers. Definition of intuition.

intuition_for_programmers.md, after:

# Intuition for Programmers

## The Value of Intuition

Programming is complex. The amount of complexity we have to deal with to implement what the business wants seems simple if you look at one requirement at a time, but if you look at it all together, the complexity explodes exponentially as we try to keep everything working. It's quite the balancing act. Because of that complexity, programming requires us to be as creative as we possibly can. 

As programmers, we know that programming is an inherently creative activity. We have to be creative, in order to meet and combat the complexity that we face. We find ourselves in situations where we need to find solutions as quickly as possible, and since we are always doing new features, it's rare that we ever do something twice. The businesses that we work for need us to be doing things that haven't been done. And we have to do it within a very short timeframe. We don't have the luxury to cycle through all the possible solutions to find the best one. The business depends on us to do the best we can with not much time. We need an ability or a drive that can help us make instinctive cognitive leaps towards the solutions we need to find. I want to argue that this capability, this drive, is called intuition. 

Whether we know it or not, programmers use intuition every day. I believe it would be helpful to discuss what intuition is, because being aware of the category of intuition can help us understand when we can trust it, and when we will hit some of its limitiations. It's a very powerful force in a programmer's life, but it cannot solve all problems. That's my promise to you, that after reading this, you will better understand intuition as a tool in your programming toolbox.

## What is Intuition?

The product of intuition is immediately grasped knowledge. The source of this knowledge is not our eyes, or ears, or any sort of machination that we can break down and analyze. Intuition seems to skip all of that machinery and upload mental connections directly into our minds. Within the sphere of software programming, we experience it primarily as a solution to a problem that comes to us instantly and suddenly. We are stuck on a problem, we go away for a little while, or overnight, and the next thing we know, the solution comes to us, without any serious number crunching and almost, it seems, without effort. Somehow, our mind searches for a solution and appears to skip the actual execution of the search algorithm. It almost seems like we're plugged into a different reality. 

If I were to give a definition for intuition, it would be the following: intuition is the art of putting ideas together. What was disconnected becomes connected. What was an unreachable outcome becomes possible.

These experiences are some of the most rewarding and satisfying experiences we can have as programmers. Without occasional realizations of solutions, programming can get dull and dreary, as we have to grind on a problem. We lose our ability to think quickly and trudge along as our slower, logical mind tries to catch up by verifying the validity of our intuitions, and the consistency of our conclusions against our assumptions. For the most part, these intuitions lie outside of our direct control. But there are things we can do to allow our intuitions to more effectively help us find solutions.

## The Kinds of Intuition

Carl Jung made a distinction between two kinds of intuition based on an intuition's orientation: extraverted intuitions and introverted intuitions.

### Introverted Intuition

Introverted Intuition is a further breakdown of the category of intuition. For us, as programmers, we would experience it as the abstractions that we are all familiar with, that we use everyday. The design patterns, best practices, business rules. Introverted Intuition is already-known abstractions. They are conclusions that come after years of experience and practice that have been abstracted out into wise rules for programming. In software terms, introverted intuition is previously-stored abstract data. This is the knowledge that has stood the test of time.

static, synthesized

### Extraverted Intuition

Extraverted Intuition is the power of intuition oriented towards an external world. This external world is not physical. It is the abstract stream of consciousness that plays words in your head, reminds you of embarassing things, and shows you solutions to difficult software problems.

dynamic, synthesizing


The thing about intuitions is that they are separated from the physical world. There are good things and bad things about that. But they appear to us primarily as abstractions, and so aren't as fully grounded as the facts of sensation.

While we can appreciate the immediacy of intuitions, they can affect us only indirectly. We create systems, based on these abstractions, that are able to push and pull on the physical world.




Not all intuitions are true. The intuitions that have come to us as brainstorms that have not stood the test of time fall under the category of Extraverted Intuition. The intuitions that we have found useful, that capture an abstract essence of the sensations we are considering fall under the category of Introverted Intuition.

The Sweet-Spot for Intuition



## The Limits of Intuition


### The Limits of Introverted Intuition

The danger with an over-reliance on intuition is that you won't be able to tackle new problems. By focusing on best practices and already-received solutions, new solutions won't come to the fore.

### The Limits of Extraverted Intuition

The thing about intuitions is that they're all in our head. As programmers, we are used to, and can quite enjoy, living inside our head. While intuitions have a reality about them, compared to the outside world that we can see and hear and touch, intuitions are abstractions. They symbolize things and relationships that we find in the concrete world.

One of the things that intuition cannot solve are NP-hard problems. 

Priming the Pump of Intuition


Conclusion
