matrix.md, before:

# The Kantian Matrix for Cognitive Functions

In this essay I would like to share a schema that Immanuel Kant first came up with and used extensively in his first treatise, "The Critique of Pure Reason." I believe that it was foundational to Jung's understanding of Cognitive Functions, since he was, philosophically, a Neo-Kantian. I hope that an explanation of some of Kant's terminology will help to illuminate what Jung was really trying to do when he named the eight Cognitive Functions, and so allow us to find better definitions for the eight categories. These categories are made up of multiple distinctions, and allow us to navigate the world efficiently and effectively. A single distinction divides the world in two. Distinctions help us make sense of the world. It helps us to figure out where to go up or down, left or right, whether what we do is right or wrong, and whether what we are pursuing is what we want, or what we do not want. Immanuel Kant makes use of some very abstract distinctions as the theoretical foundation for his critique of pure reason.

## The Distinction Between *a priori* and *a posteriori*

For Immanuel Kant, one of the major distinctions he tried to make was that between *a priori* and *a posteriori* cognitions. *a priori* is Latin for "before," and *a posteriori* is Latin for after. Those cognitions that we have without reference to concrete perceptions of the outside world, he termed *a priori*, before experience. Those cognitions that we have that reference the external, physical world, he termed *a posteriori*, after experience.

## The Distinction Between Analytical and Synthetical

Kant also distinguishes between something he calls the analytical and the synethetical. The analytical are those modes of thought that only reference definitions and nothing outside of those definitions. An example of an analytical idea would be the number three. We can imagine three things in our mind without having to see three things. The synthetical modes of thought bring in concepts or experiences outside of those definitions to add to already-known definitions. An example of a synthetical idea would be the concept for a tree. We have to have seen a tree to fully imagine how complicated it is.

## The Kantian Matrix

The Cognitive Functions are a set of categories. It's a way of dividing the world into eight categories. One way to clarify the boundaries of these categories is to slot them into another set of categories. In my interpretation, Jung's Cognitive Functions perfectly fit into a set of categories that Kant marks out from the beginning of "The Critique of Pure Reason." Kant's set of categories can be organized visually into a matrix. In this matrix, along one axis is the analytical and synthetical distinction. Along the other matrix is the *a priori* and *a posteriori* distinction. From there we can place each Cognitive Function in its propery category according to Kant's schema:

| | Analytical | Synthetical |
| ---- | --- | --- |
| *a priori* | Ti, Fi, Ni |  Ti, Fi, Ni, Ne |
| *a posteriori* | Te, Fe, Ni, Si | Te, Fe, Ni, Si, Se |


## The First Quadrant: Analytical and *a priori*

In the analytical and *a priori* quadrant, the focus of the mind is on the definitions and ideas and concepts themselves. Apart from what they might entail, these are the abstract definitions that make up what we usually think of as abstract thought. This quadrant is also *a priori* because it has no reference to the material world. It focuses on the world of pure abstract definitions, or at least it pretends to. To me, that implies that in this quadrant we can experience Introverted Intuition, as the cognitive function representing abstract ideas, as well as the introverted judging functions, Introverted Thinking and Introverted Feeling. In this kind of thinking, Ti and Ni focus exclusively on the abstractions and attempt to not go outside of those strict definitional boundaries.

Kant explains how the first quadrant is indeed "highly important and necessary, they are so, only to arrive at the clearness of conceptions which is a requisite for a sure and extended synthesis." The cognitive functions of Introverted Thinking and Introverted Feeling are a necessary waypoint on the way to actual knowledge about the real world.

The question may arise why Introverted Feeling should be contained in this quadrant. I would argue that Introverted Feeling, in a Kantian sense, would consist of a deontological approach to morality, rather than bringing in any empirical, experiential source of cognition. 

## The Second Quadrant: Synthetical and *a priori*

The second matrix is where things get more interesting. Most of the Critique of Pure Reason focuses on this quadrant. Here the mode of thinking is still abstract, separate from experience, but it tries to bring in logical inductions and deductions that might be implied from the definitions. Here, we might the spheres of mathematics and pure physics, and in the Critique of Pure Reason he tries to apply this kind of thinking to metaphysics.

What makes this quadrant synthetical is it tries to combine the abstract definitions of quadrant one with the logical underpinnings implied in those definitions. It asks what else must be true about a certain definition for that definition to be true. The primary example we get in "The Critique of Pure Reason" is that of cause and effect. In order for science to be possible, we must approach it with the assumption that cause and effect is real and operating in the real world. We don't just come to the world without assumptions, and we certainly can't discover anything noteworthy without an inquisitive, judging approach to the world.

In this quadrant, we first get sight of the cognitive function Extraverted Intuition, the realm of abstract thought. We go beyond the basic definitions and our mind can roam freely to find logical conclusions that are not immediately apparent. Our judgments arrived at by using Introverted Thinking and Introverted Feeling are operating in a synthetical mode because our mind is attempting to combine our abstract definitions with the implied abstract, metaphysical world within the mind. Introverted Thinking and Introverted Feeling operate in a synethetical mode

## The Third Quadrant: Analytical and *a posteriori*

The Third Quadrant is the first one that includes knowledge of the concrete, physical world. Our concepts and definitions are less abstract and can include ideas like "cat" and "dog." We aren't actively referencing the material world, but we are remembering what we have encountered, our experiences, the facts of various situations, and bringing that to bear on our concepts and judgments.

In this mode, we are not exercising Introverted Thinking and Introverted Feeling, but their cousins, Extraverted Thinking and Extraverted Feeling. Te and Fe are synthetical in their nature, as they try to combine the the principles we have and the experiences we have encountered. We still have reference to the abstractions that Introverted Intuition brings us, but we add the concrete experiences from Introverted Sensing.

## The Fourth Quadrant: Synthetical and *a posteriori*

Here, finally, we come to the realm where we can actually do science. Science combines all of our experiences and principles and attempts to discover rules about how the contrete world follows abstract laws.

## Cognitive Functions and the Limits of Our Attention

One of the basic points of Cognitive Functions is to explain how we cannot focus on everything at once. Our mind has limits, and so if we attend to one quadrant, we will necessarily be not as attentive to the other three quadrants. It helps explain why we have strengths and weaknesses. It explains what we love, and the reason why.

Commit message:

Add section on theoretical foundations of cognitive functions.

matrix.md, after:

# The Kantian Matrix for Cognitive Functions

In this essay I would like to share a schema that Immanuel Kant first came up with and used extensively in his first treatise, "The Critique of Pure Reason." I believe that it was foundational to Jung's understanding of Cognitive Functions, since he was, philosophically, a Neo-Kantian. I hope that an explanation of some of Kant's terminology will help to illuminate what Jung was really trying to do when he named the eight Cognitive Functions, and so allow us to find better definitions for the eight categories. These categories are made up of multiple distinctions, and allow us to navigate the world efficiently and effectively. A single distinction divides the world in two. Distinctions help us make sense of the world. It helps us to figure out where to go up or down, left or right, whether what we do is right or wrong, and whether what we are pursuing is what we want, or what we do not want. Immanuel Kant makes use of some very abstract distinctions as the theoretical foundation for his critique of pure reason.

## The Distinction Between *a priori* and *a posteriori*

For Immanuel Kant, one of the major distinctions he tried to make was that between *a priori* and *a posteriori* cognitions. *a priori* is Latin for "before," and *a posteriori* is Latin for after. Those cognitions that we have without reference to concrete perceptions of the outside world, he termed *a priori*, before experience. Those cognitions that we have that reference the external, physical world, he termed *a posteriori*, after experience.

## The Distinction Between Analytical and Synthetical

Kant also distinguishes between something he calls the analytical and the synethetical. The analytical are those modes of thought that only reference definitions and nothing outside of those definitions. An example of an analytical idea would be the number three. We can imagine three things in our mind without having to see three things. The synthetical modes of thought bring in concepts or experiences outside of those definitions to add to already-known definitions. An example of a synthetical idea would be the concept for a tree. We have to have seen a tree to fully imagine how complicated it is.

## The Kantian Matrix

The Cognitive Functions are a set of categories. It's a way of dividing the world into eight categories. One way to clarify the boundaries of these categories is to slot them into another set of categories. In my interpretation, Jung's Cognitive Functions perfectly fit into a set of categories that Kant marks out from the beginning of "The Critique of Pure Reason." Kant's set of categories can be organized visually into a matrix. In this matrix, along one axis is the analytical and synthetical distinction. Along the other matrix is the *a priori* and *a posteriori* distinction. From there we can place each Cognitive Function in its propery category according to Kant's schema:

| | Analytical | Synthetical |
| ---- | --- | --- |
| *a priori* | Ti, Fi, Ni |  Ti, Fi, Ni, Ne |
| *a posteriori* | Te, Fe, Ni, Si | Te, Fe, Ni, Si, Se |


## The First Quadrant: Analytical and *a priori*

In the analytical and *a priori* quadrant, the focus of the mind is on the definitions and ideas and concepts themselves. Apart from what they might entail, these are the abstract definitions that make up what we usually think of as abstract thought. This quadrant is also *a priori* because it has no reference to the material world. It focuses on the world of pure abstract definitions, or at least it pretends to. To me, that implies that in this quadrant we can experience Introverted Intuition, as the cognitive function representing abstract ideas, as well as the introverted judging functions, Introverted Thinking and Introverted Feeling. In this kind of thinking, Ti and Ni focus exclusively on the abstractions and attempt to not go outside of those strict definitional boundaries.

Kant explains how the first quadrant is indeed "highly important and necessary, they are so, only to arrive at the clearness of conceptions which is a requisite for a sure and extended synthesis." The cognitive functions of Introverted Thinking and Introverted Feeling are a necessary waypoint on the way to actual knowledge about the real world.

The question may arise why Introverted Feeling should be contained in this quadrant. I would argue that Introverted Feeling, in a Kantian sense, would consist of a deontological approach to morality, rather than bringing in any empirical, experiential source of cognition. 

## The Second Quadrant: Synthetical and *a priori*

The second matrix is where things get more interesting. Most of the Critique of Pure Reason focuses on this quadrant. Here the mode of thinking is still abstract, separate from experience, but it tries to bring in logical inductions and deductions that might be implied from the definitions. Here, we might the spheres of mathematics and pure physics, and in the Critique of Pure Reason he tries to apply this kind of thinking to metaphysics.

What makes this quadrant synthetical is it tries to combine the abstract definitions of quadrant one with the logical underpinnings implied in those definitions. It asks what else must be true about a certain definition for that definition to be true. The primary example we get in "The Critique of Pure Reason" is that of cause and effect. In order for science to be possible, we must approach it with the assumption that cause and effect is real and operating in the real world. We don't just come to the world without assumptions, and we certainly can't discover anything noteworthy without an inquisitive, judging approach to the world.

In this quadrant, we first get sight of the cognitive function Extraverted Intuition, the realm of abstract thought. We go beyond the basic definitions and our mind can roam freely to find logical conclusions that are not immediately apparent. Our judgments arrived at by using Introverted Thinking and Introverted Feeling are operating in a synthetical mode because our mind is attempting to combine our abstract definitions with the implied abstract, metaphysical world within the mind. Introverted Thinking and Introverted Feeling operate in a synethetical mode

## The Third Quadrant: Analytical and *a posteriori*

The Third Quadrant is the first one that includes knowledge of the concrete, physical world. Our concepts and definitions are less abstract and can include ideas like "cat" and "dog." We aren't actively referencing the material world, but we are remembering what we have encountered, our experiences, the facts of various situations, and bringing that to bear on our concepts and judgments.

In this mode, we are not exercising Introverted Thinking and Introverted Feeling, but their cousins, Extraverted Thinking and Extraverted Feeling. Te and Fe are synthetical in their nature, as they try to combine the the principles we have and the experiences we have encountered. We still have reference to the abstractions that Introverted Intuition brings us, but we add the concrete experiences from Introverted Sensing.

## The Fourth Quadrant: Synthetical and *a posteriori*

Here, finally, we come to the realm where we can actually do science. Science combines all of our experiences and principles and attempts to discover rules about how the contrete world follows abstract laws. The missing element, up to this point, has been Extraverted Sensing, that cognitive function that gives us our five senses. Without Extraverted Sensing we cannot use the scientific method and verify any of our theoretical predictions.

<!--
## Cognitive Functions As An Example of Second Quadrant Concepts

### Cognitive Functions as Intuitioned Behaviors

There are many ways to try to define the limits of each Cognitive Function. There are many on Youtube and elsewhere where the definitions of Cognitive Functions are no more than an expression of their ingrained biases towards different kinds of behaviors and attitudes.

### Cognitive Functions as Scientific Behaviors

### Cognitive Functions as Synthetical *a priori* Categories

###


## Cognitive Functions and the Limits of Our Attention

One of the basic points of Cognitive Functions is to explain how we cannot focus on everything at once. Our mind has limits, and so if we attend to one quadrant, we will necessarily be not as attentive to the other three quadrants. It helps explain why we have strengths and weaknesses. It explains what we love, and the reason why.
-->
