scope.md, before:

# What To Expect

## What You will learn in this Course

1. The value of Cognitive Functions as a tool for categorization.
1. What categories make up the Cognitive Functions. The tradeoffs within each category.
1. How to categorize using Cognitive Functions, for finding pathways in life and in the execution of software projects.

## What you will NOT learn in this course

1. Your personality type. There are plenty of other people doing that out there. If you already know your type I can help you analyze it or give you my perspective, but ultimately deciphering type is not what I do.
1. How to type people. Type, while interesting, only works in the average case. For any particular situation or interaction, a person may be acting without or outside of their type.
1. How to interpret cognitive functions in a scientific way. Cognitive functions are not scientific.
1. An introduction to Jung. I'm using the names of his categories, but I've defined them as abstractly as possible so I can apply them to software development.

Commit message:

Update for issue #3. Make sure to mention strengths in the scope.

scope.md, after:

# What To Expect

## What You will learn in this Course

1. The value of Cognitive Functions as a tool for categorization.
1. What categories make up the Cognitive Functions. The tradeoffs within each category.
1. How to categorize using Cognitive Functions, for finding pathways in life and in the execution of software projects.
1. Understand the software team's strengths and in what conditions the team can really excel.

## What you will NOT learn in this course

1. Your personality type. There are plenty of other people doing that out there. If you already know your type I can help you analyze it or give you my perspective, but ultimately deciphering type is not what I do.
1. How to type people. Type, while interesting, only works in the average case. For any particular situation or interaction, a person may be acting without or outside of their type.
1. How to interpret cognitive functions in a scientific way. Cognitive functions are not scientific.
1. An introduction to Jung. I'm using the names of his categories, but I've defined them as abstractly as possible so I can apply them to software development.
