what_cogfuncs.md, before:

# What are Cognitive Functions?

Cognitive functions describe relationships, so that we can focus on the relationship, not necessarily on the thing at each end of the relationship. To categorize things isn't really that interesting. It's only when we examine the things in relationships that things truly get interesting.

## Cognitive Functions as Relational Categories

As I've said previously, cognitive functions are categories that describe relationships. Here they are, in the most abstract form possible:

Two functions for interacting with the world, and navigating within that world -

1. Between two concrete objects. (Extraverted Thinking - Te)
1. Between two people, not including yourself. (Extraverted Feeling - Fe)

Two functions for decision-making -

1. Between two abstract objects, not people. (Introverted Thinking - Ti)
1. Between a concrete object or person and yourself. (Introverted Feeling - Fi)

Two functions for attending to the world -

1. Between you and the physical world. (Extraverted Sensing - Se)
1. Between you and the abstract world. (Extraverted Intuition - Ne)

Two functions for storing and retrieving knowledge -

1. Between you and the library of concrete knowledge. (Introverted Sensing - Si)
1. Between you and the library of abstract knowledge. (Introverted Inutiotion - Ni)

### Cognitive Functions, as Applied to Software Development

As you can see, these are very, very, very abstract categories. They get their power from being abstract. I've really tried to boil away any unnecessary part to get to the essence and power of cognitive functions, so that we can apply them to the field of software development. For now, the definitions above are too abstract to understand without several examples, so let me give you some representative relationships that will be easier to grasp until I get into more detail when I cover each function individually:

1. Introverted Intuition (Ni) - abstractions
1. Introverted Sensing (Si) - artifacts
1. Extraverted Intuition (Ne) - path generation
1. Extraverted Sensing (Se) - facts/events

1. Introverted Thinking (Ti) - logic
1. Introverted Feeling (Fi) - programmer comfort
1. Extraverted Thinking (Te) - systems 
1. Extraverted Feeling (Fe) - collaboration

Again, these are not definitions for the cognitive functions themselves. But they act as a representative sample of aspects we find within a software project that puts a little more meat on the bones of the actual definitions.

## Pathfinding and Tradeoffs

Okay, so what? How do these categories help us choose a path? There are two primary problems when choosing a path. First, you can choose a path and not be flexible enough to change it. Second, you can bounce around between paths so often you don't actually get anywhere. You need something to let you know which path you have chosen, and which path you've not chosen. These categories can tell you those things because also have relationships between each other, such that they define a set of tradeoffs that we don't always notice:

There are several kinds of tradeoffs we can encounter. We should be aware about them and notice what we may be giving up when we depend on one function too much, to the detriment of our projects.

1. Ti/Fi - Systematic/Experiential
1. Ti/Fe - Logical/Communal
1. Te/Fi - Practical/Moral
1. Te/Ti - Particular/Universal
1. Fe/Fi - Individual/Communal
1. Fe/Te - Communal/Practical

There are two other axes that have to do with the data that we deal with:

1. Ni/Si - Abstract knowledge/concrete knowledge
1. Ne/Se - Abstract world/concrete world
1. Ni/Se - Abstract knowledge/concrete world
1. Ne/Si - Abstract world/concrete knowledge

These tradeoffs, when made conscious and explicit, help us to figure out which path we've chosen by our decisions, and which kinds of things we have prioritized.

Copyright 2019 Steve Lewis All Rights Reserved

Commit message:

Describe functions in terms of paths and path choosing.

what_cogfuncs.md, after:

# What are Cognitive Functions?

Cognitive functions describe relationships, so that we can focus on the relationship, not necessarily on the thing at each end of the relationship. To categorize things isn't really that interesting. It's only when we examine the things in relationships that things truly get interesting.

## Cognitive Functions as Relational Categories

As I've said previously, cognitive functions are categories that describe relationships. Here they are, in the most abstract form possible:

Two functions for interacting with the world, and navigating within that world -

1. Between two concrete objects. (Extraverted Thinking - Te)
1. Between two people, not including yourself. (Extraverted Feeling - Fe)

Two functions for decision-making -

1. Between two abstract objects, not people. (Introverted Thinking - Ti)
1. Between a concrete object or person and yourself. (Introverted Feeling - Fi)

Two functions for attending to the world -

1. Between you and the physical world. (Extraverted Sensing - Se)
1. Between you and the abstract world. (Extraverted Intuition - Ne)

Two functions for storing and retrieving knowledge -

1. Between you and the library of concrete knowledge. (Introverted Sensing - Si)
1. Between you and the library of abstract knowledge. (Introverted Inutiotion - Ni)

### Cognitive Functions, as Applied to Software Development

As you can see, these are very, very, very abstract categories. They get their power from being abstract. I've really tried to boil away any unnecessary part to get to the essence and power of cognitive functions, so that we can apply them to the field of software development. For now, the definitions above are too abstract to understand without several examples, so let me describe in terms of pathfinding, since that, ultimately, is why we're here:

1. Introverted Intuition (Ni) - old abstract paths (abstractions/patterns)
1. Introverted Sensing (Si) - old concrete paths (artifacts)
1. Extraverted Intuition (Ne) - new abstract paths (path generation)
1. Extraverted Sensing (Se) - new concrete paths (facts/events)

1. Introverted Thinking (Ti) - choosing paths based on logic
1. Introverted Feeling (Fi) - choosing paths based on value
1. Extraverted Thinking (Te) - choosing paths based on practicality
1. Extraverted Feeling (Fe) - choosing paths based on collaboration

Again, these are not definitions for the cognitive functions themselves. But they act as a representative sample of aspects we find within a software project that puts a little more meat on the bones of the actual definitions.

## Pathfinding and Tradeoffs

Okay, so what? How do these categories help us choose a path? There are two primary problems when choosing a path. First, you can choose a path and not be flexible enough to change it. Second, you can bounce around between paths so often you don't actually get anywhere. You need something to let you know which path you have chosen, and which path you've not chosen. These categories can tell you those things because also have relationships between each other, such that they define a set of tradeoffs that we don't always notice:

There are several kinds of tradeoffs we can encounter. We should be aware about them and notice what we may be giving up when we depend on one function too much, to the detriment of our projects.

1. Ti/Fi - Systematic/Experiential
1. Ti/Fe - Logical/Communal
1. Te/Fi - Practical/Moral
1. Te/Ti - Particular/Universal
1. Fe/Fi - Individual/Communal
1. Fe/Te - Communal/Practical

There are two other axes that have to do with the data that we deal with:

1. Ni/Si - Abstract knowledge/concrete knowledge
1. Ne/Se - Abstract world/concrete world
1. Ni/Se - Abstract knowledge/concrete world
1. Ne/Si - Abstract world/concrete knowledge

These tradeoffs, when made conscious and explicit, help us to figure out which path we've chosen by our decisions, and which kinds of things we have prioritized.

Copyright 2019 Steve Lewis All Rights Reserved
