why_cogfuncs.md, before:

# Why Cognitive Functions?

I didn't want to code anymore. I was bored, frustrated, annoyed, tired. I wasn't having fun anymore. Which was too bad, because that's a good part of the reason I went into software: because I enjoyed it, and I was halfway decent at it. These feelings made me ask questions I thought I'd never ask, like, "Do I want to be a programmer anymore?" I always thought I'd want to code until I'm 80 years old. I'm telling you my story because it turns out alright; the ending is a good ending. And since it has a good ending, I will recount what I learned on that journey. It was hard for me to figure out how I'd even gotten to that difficult point in my life, personally and professionally. But I began to search for better tools that would help me out of my predicament, and the most powerful tool I ran across in my search were the eight cognitive functions, first defined by Carl Jung.

## Categorizing the World, Myself, and Others



## Cognitive Functions as Relational Categories

Categories are crucial for making sense of the world. They allow us to perceive different kinds of things, as well as attaching significance to the things that we perceive. The cognitive functions, in particular, are categories that describe how we relate to the world, ourselves, and other people. Cognitive functions are relational categories. 

And the cognitive functions are weird categories. They're unlike anything I've ever run across in my life. But only the weirdest categories can make you look at the world in a different way.


Another way to get familiar with these categories is to think of them as jargon. As programmers, we deal with jargon all the time. We know that naming things is one of the hardest things to do, and we try our best to choose names that make the most sense and don't collide with other important concepts that we're also using. We also know that we can't start the naming process over every time we want to hash things out. And so, over time, a technical jargon is constructed that contains the common concepts that we need to draw from in order to communicate effectively and efficiently.

You may know that personality typing systems, like the MBTI, are loosely based on the original cognitive functions as defined by Carl Jung. The MBTI has been criticized over the years for not being scientific enough. But for some reason the MBTI keeps humming along because it helps people on teams get to know each other better, and discuss things that aren't always easy to discuss like personal perspectives. Similarly, cognitive Functions are not scientific. They don't model the world in a way that's scientifically predictable. If anything, they are philosophical categories. But I want to emphasize cognitive functions as a cultural tool, a common lingo for talking about attention. Because that in itself is valuable if I have a way to communicate to you and to my coworkers about what I'm paying attention to. Perhaps I'm paying attention to the wrong thing. Perhaps you can help direct my attention to something that will more quickly help me do my job.


## Cognitive Functions as Model

As software programmers, we deal with models everyday. Programming models, models of the world, data models, behavioral models. But not everyone loves models. In their book, __Nine Lies About Work__, Marcus Buckingham and Ashley Goodall talk about how training and development can seem exciting at first, when hearing about dynamic leaders, and then "a facilitator steps to the front of the room and explains *the model*. The model takes whatever we've just seen and experienced and makes it boring" (p. 222). Which is funny, because I'm wanting to introduce you to a model.

What model is that? Well, it's very similar to something we deal with every day. It's an array of arrays, or a list of lists. Each cognitive function describes a particular relationship with the world, or myself, or others. But there are also particular relationships between each cognitive function. Which means that the cognitive functions serve as a model that describes the relationships between relational categories. It's not recursive, it's just two levels deep.


Cognitive functions describe a model of attention that says certain things about attention:

1. We can't pay attention to everything at once.
1. Certain kinds of attention can go together. Certain kinds of attention are exclusive.
1. These different kinds of attention allow us to develop our strengths, and conversly, our weaknesses.
1. Different people preferring different kinds of attention leads to conflict.
1. Understanding what other people use as categories can go a long way in reducing conflict.



Not everybody wants to learn a model, even if it might improve their lives. And most 

(theory building?)

Commit message:

Update for issue #2. Continue telling story of journey.

why_cogfuncs.md, after:

# Why Cognitive Functions?

I didn't want to code anymore. I was bored, frustrated, annoyed, tired. I wasn't having fun anymore. Which was too bad, because that's a good part of the reason I went into software: because I enjoyed it, and I was halfway decent at it. These feelings made me ask questions I thought I'd never ask, like, "Do I want to be a programmer anymore?" I always thought I'd want to code until I'm 80 years old. I'm telling you my story because it turns out alright; the ending is a good ending. And since it has a good ending, I will recount what I learned on that journey. It was hard for me to figure out how I'd even gotten to that difficult point in my life, personally and professionally. But I began to search for better tools that would help me out of my predicament, and the most powerful tool I ran across in my search were the eight cognitive functions, first defined by Carl Jung.

## A Programmer's Journey

So what did the cognitive functions bring? Clarity. Clarity of thought. I was a mess of emotions and I didn't know how to sort them out. I was anxious about the future, confused about the past. I didn't have a way to sort through which thoughts were which. I didn't have a way to figure out the things I had been ignoring, to my own detriment. I didn't have a way to figure out I was focusing too much on certain things and needed some sort of balance, but also balance in the right amount.


## Cognitive Functions as Relational Categories

Categories are crucial for making sense of the world. They allow us to perceive different kinds of things, as well as attaching significance to the things that we perceive. The cognitive functions, in particular, are categories that describe how we relate to the world, ourselves, and other people. Cognitive functions are relational categories. 

And the cognitive functions are weird categories. They're unlike anything I've ever run across in my life. But only the weirdest categories can make you look at the world in a different way. Categories provide clarity.
Also, I was the kind of person that just hated boundaries and hated when people put me or others into a box. I thought I was too complex. What I didn't understand was an unwillingness to pick up some useful categories was making me appear too simple. And you can't stay simple in a complex world.


Another way to get familiar with these categories is to think of them as jargon. As programmers, we deal with jargon all the time. We know that naming things is one of the hardest things to do, and we try our best to choose names that make the most sense and don't collide with other important concepts that we're also using. We also know that we can't start the naming process over every time we want to hash things out. And so, over time, a technical jargon is constructed that contains the common concepts that we need to draw from in order to communicate effectively and efficiently.

You may know that personality typing systems, like the MBTI, are loosely based on the original cognitive functions as defined by Carl Jung. The MBTI has been criticized over the years for not being scientific enough. But for some reason the MBTI keeps humming along because it helps people on teams get to know each other better, and discuss things that aren't always easy to discuss like personal perspectives. Similarly, cognitive Functions are not scientific. They don't model the world in a way that's scientifically predictable. If anything, they are philosophical categories. But I want to emphasize cognitive functions as a cultural tool, a common lingo for talking about attention. Because that in itself is valuable if I have a way to communicate to you and to my coworkers about what I'm paying attention to. Perhaps I'm paying attention to the wrong thing. Perhaps you can help direct my attention to something that will more quickly help me do my job.


## Cognitive Functions as Model

As software programmers, we deal with models everyday. Programming models, models of the world, data models, behavioral models. But not everyone loves models. In their book, __Nine Lies About Work__, Marcus Buckingham and Ashley Goodall talk about how training and development can seem exciting at first, when hearing about dynamic leaders, and then "a facilitator steps to the front of the room and explains *the model*. The model takes whatever we've just seen and experienced and makes it boring" (p. 222). Which is funny, because I'm wanting to introduce you to a model.

What model is that? Well, it's very similar to something we deal with every day. It's an array of arrays, or a list of lists. Each cognitive function describes a particular relationship with the world, or myself, or others. But there are also particular relationships between each cognitive function. Which means that the cognitive functions serve as a model that describes the relationships between relational categories. It's not recursive, it's just two levels deep.


Cognitive functions describe a model of attention that says certain things about attention:

1. We can't pay attention to everything at once.
1. Certain kinds of attention can go together. Certain kinds of attention are exclusive.
1. These different kinds of attention allow us to develop our strengths, and conversly, our weaknesses.
1. Different people preferring different kinds of attention leads to conflict.
1. Understanding what other people use as categories can go a long way in reducing conflict.



Not everybody wants to learn a model, even if it might improve their lives. And most 

(theory building?)
