# Why I Read Philosophy

I love philosophy because I love to think. I love philosophy because I love to think about abstract things like values, categories, and the connections between ideas. But it's also a very practical interest that helps me be a better programmer.

Ever since I started reading a book on Heidegger my roommate had left on his desk in our freshman apartment, I have been enamored with philosophy. But I haven't always made time to read philosophy. In college and through most of my twenties, I read Friedrich Nietzsche's work almost every day. My copy of The Joyful Science was well-worn, the plastic peeling away from the paperback cover. At some point, most likely because of the busyness of life, work, and family, I stopped reading philosophy on a regular basis. 

I picked up my philosophy habit again a few years ago. Now, I read philosophy before I got to bed. In order to keep my sense of wonder and inspiration so that I can continue to be creative, I need to maintain my connection to the realm of ideas. Without at least one foot in that realm, my spirit withers and begins to fade and lose its color.

My current interest in philosophy is primarily driven by my curiousity about how categories work. For instance, the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jungian_cognitive_functions">Jungian cognitive functions</a> are a set of categories about how we perceive and judge reality. There are multiple, multiple explanations of the cognitive functions on the internet. And almost everyone seems to have a slightly different definition of the cognitive functions. That conundrum has led me to wonder how one would even establish a solid set of definitions for cognitive functions.

One way would be to scientifically establish how cognitive functions appear behaviorally in the world, and tweak those until you end up with a eight definitions of particular behavior. But at this point they are not really definitions of cognition. They have mutated, in the process of verification, into definitions of clear, distinct behaviors.

An other way, and really the primary way of philosophy, is to establish categories a priori, apart from a consideration of behaviors, so that we can focus on the categories through which we see the world. One could attempt to philosophically map out the possible definitions of the cognitive functions according to categories that necessarily show up in our patterns of thought. In so doing the process would allow the categories to retain their status as categories relating to cognition.

And this line of thought has made me wonder about how categories work. How are they constructed? How does one move from one category to another? Are they always disjoint, with no relation? Or is there a series of complex relationships between them?

As programmers, we use categories every day, as we debug, as we design, as we code new features. We are constantly having to find our way among various boundary conditions to find the right distinctions for implementing functionality that actually works. For me, reading philosophy helps me to become familiar with new categories and new ways of creating categories, so that I can be a more effective programmer.