Kant begins the Transcendental Analytic by outlining what appears to be criteria for the categories. He doesn't explicitly call them categories yet, he calls them conceptions. These conceptions will make up the elements of the pure cognition of the understanding. The understanding consists of both pure and empirical abilities, but this section focuses on pure concepts.
  First, the conceptions must be pure and not empirical. Later on, Kant will criticize Aristotle's categories for being impure and not consistently abstract enough.
  Secondly, the conceptions must not belong to intuition or sensibility, but to thought and understanding. That means that the concepts must have a form, but no content.
  Thirdly, the conceptions must be elementary conceptions. They must not be made up of compound and the cannot be deduced. This makes me think of mathematical axioms, that are taken for granted and on which a mathematical system can be built.
  Fourthly, and finally, the conceptions must be tabulated as a complete table, so that no corner of the understanding is missed.
  Kant goes on to describe the method which will not work, the empirical and inductive method which guesses and gradually, over time, can figure out the totality of a system. Each element must find its place in the system by being connected, conceptually, to the other parts of the system. An idea will define the completeness and assist in the definition of the system. Kant does not appear to tell us what that idea is quite yet.
