prelude/advice.md, before:

# You Need 100 Times More Advice Than You Think You Need

When you are lost, you don't know what you don't know. You're not even sure where you are, let alone where you might want to go. And you're not exactly sure how you even got to this point. When I was going through my mid-life crisis, I wasn't depressed, really. I was more confused, and couldn't find a way through the fog. And there was no one really who could solve it for me. Because no one knows me like I know me, and no one knows you like you know you. And as confusing as oneself may be to onself, it's even more confusing for someone on the outside looking in. So, I had to go searching. But it was a lot more work, and took a lot more time, and was a lot more lonely, than I expected. Which leads me to my first point: you need a lot more advice than you think you need.

What do I mean by that? Most advice you can get, whether from a book or face-to-face, is not going to be directly relevant. Maybe it eventually will be helpful, but when you're lost, you don't know which piece of advice is going to be the next helpful step you need. The world is complex and filled with options. Infinite permutations await you. And even when people tell you the right thing to do or to know, you're not always in a position to accept or act on that advice. That's the funny thing about advice: it's usually either too abstract or to concrete. Let's break that down.

## Abstract Advice

A lot of the advice one can get may come in the form of platitudes or cliches. That doesn't mean they're not true, it just means that they are so removed from a concrete context that you probably don't see how it might apply to your situation. Or if you see how it could apply, you aren't able to put it into practice, for whatever reason. We see this all the time at the beginning of a movie. The protagonist hears a piece of advice, "Face your fears," or "believe in yourself," and it has no relevance at first, and only after going through the journey does the advice make any sense at all. What you really need from advice is a course of action, suggesting actions that you would be willing to take that get you one step closer to clarity. Maybe the advice you receive is great advice, but you are unwilling or unable to take that advice for one year. What you need instead is your next step, customized to you and the moment you are in, right now.

## Concrete Advice

A different kind of problem with advice is that it can come as too concrete. It might be good advice, like "brush your teeth," but it fails to address the bigger picture. In addition, if it's too concrete, if it's too scientifically accurate to my person and situation, I lose the sense of choosing a path out of my free will. I need a little wiggle-room. Even if I can't accept certain things today, I may be able to accept them in time, but if it feels like an inevitable destiny, I will probably tend to resist it. That's just human nature.

We need enough advice and enough kinds of advice that allows us to move up and down the ladder of abstraction. Without that we are stuck either at a too-low resolution or a too-high resolution with no connection in between.

## Category Errors Within Advice

Another point when advice is unhelpful is when it involves the wrong sphere of application. For me, my mid-life crisis primarily was one around my career. I got a lot of my practical identity from my career, and when I couldn't figure out my next move and was floundering, I was unable to begin to look for customized career advice. It took me a long time to figure out that that was my problem. It wasn't primarily spiritual, or religious, or obviously health-related. It was about what I did everyday at work, and what I wanted to do, and what I could do, and what I was good at, and what I could be good at. And I wasn't even asking the right questions for a long time.

## Digesting Advice

There are many reasons advice doesn't hit home. I've outlined three, but my primary point is that all of these things that keep advice from helping you mean that you need to consume 100 to 1000 times more advice than you will be able to digest. Without that amount of data you may not get what you need. And no one can force-feed you all the various solutions in the world. There's not enough hours spent at church, or on a therapist's couch in a week to get you the amount of advice that you need. Even if an advisor were available an hour a day, it's still too small a stream of information, when you need a river.

If you are at a point of burnout, as I was, you will need to give yourself extra time to sort through this information. You are slower than usual at both taking in and processing new information. For me, it has taken me years. But that level of time and effort is worth it so you can get to the other side. No one else can do it for you, unfortunately.

## Systematizing Advice

Once you begin to get enough advice, you need to be able to consider and sort it into some sort of comprehensive system. For the too-concrete advice, you need to be able to add context to give a bigger picture. For the too-abstract advice, you need to be able to break down the steps you might need to take in order for it to become realized. For advice that's in the wrong ballpark, you need to figure out what your basic problem is and do your best to pay attention to the kind of advice that at least begins to address your primary confusion and primary fears.

Because what you're really trying to do in this process is create an internal direction-finding machine, that takes in advice and spits out a meaningful direction that makes sense. Nothing too specific, because that would be weird, but also not too abstract, because that would be useless.

Commit message:

Second revision of addressing the amount of advice you need.

prelude/advice.md, after:

# You Need 100 Times More Advice Than You Think You Need

When you are lost, you don't know what you don't know. You're not even sure where you are, let alone where you might want to go. And you're not exactly sure how you even got to this point. When I was going through my mid-life crisis, I wasn't depressed, really. I was more confused, and couldn't find a way through the fog. And there was no one really who could solve it for me. Because no one knows me like I know me, and no one knows you like you know you. And as confusing as oneself may be to onself, it's even more confusing for someone on the outside looking in. So, I had to go searching. But it was a lot more work, and took a lot more time, and was a lot more lonely, than I expected. Which leads me to my first point: you need a lot more advice than you think you need.

What do I mean by that? Most advice you can get, whether from a book or face-to-face, is not going to be directly relevant. Maybe it eventually will be helpful, but when you're lost, you don't know which piece of advice is going to be the next helpful step you need. The world is complex and filled with options. Infinite permutations await you. And even when people tell you the right thing to do or to know, you're not always in a position to accept or act on that advice. That's the funny thing about advice: it's usually either too abstract or to concrete. Let's break that down.

## Abstract Advice

A lot of the advice one can get may come in the form of platitudes or cliches. That doesn't mean they're not true, it just means that they are so removed from a concrete context that you probably don't see how it might apply to your situation. Or if you see how it could apply, you aren't able to put it into practice, for whatever reason. We see this all the time at the beginning of a movie. The protagonist hears a piece of advice, "Face your fears," or "believe in yourself," and it has no relevance at first, and only after going through the journey does the advice make any sense at all. What you really need from advice is a course of action, suggesting actions that you would be willing to take that get you one step closer to clarity. Maybe the advice you receive is great advice, but you are unwilling or unable to take that advice for one year. What you need instead is your next step, customized to you and the moment you are in, right now.

## Concrete Advice

A different kind of problem with advice is that it can come as too concrete. It might be good advice, like "brush your teeth," but it fails to address the bigger picture. In addition, if it's too concrete, if it's too scientifically accurate to my person and situation, I lose the sense of choosing a path out of my free will. I need a little wiggle-room. Even if I can't accept certain things today, I may be able to accept them in time, but if it feels like an inevitable destiny, I will probably tend to resist it. That's just human nature.

We need enough advice and enough kinds of advice that allows us to move up and down the ladder of abstraction. Without that we are stuck either at a too-low resolution or a too-high resolution with no connection in between.

## Category Errors Within Advice

Another point when advice is unhelpful is when it involves the wrong sphere of application. For me, my mid-life crisis primarily was one around my career. I got a lot of my practical identity from my career, and when I couldn't figure out my next move and was floundering, I was unable to begin to look for customized career advice. It took me a long time to figure out that that was my problem. It wasn't primarily spiritual, or religious, or obviously health-related. It was about what I did everyday at work, and what I wanted to do, and what I could do, and what I was good at, and what I could be good at. And I wasn't even asking the right questions for a long time.

## Digesting Advice

There are many reasons advice doesn't hit home. I've outlined three, but my primary point is that all of these things that keep advice from helping you mean that you need to consume 100 to 1000 times more advice than you will be able to digest. Without that amount of data you may not get what you need. And no one can force-feed you all the various solutions in the world. There's not enough hours spent at church, or on a therapist's couch in a week to get you the amount of advice that you need. Even if an advisor were available an hour a day, it's still too small a stream of information, when you need a river.

If you are at a point of burnout, as I was, you will need to give yourself extra time to sort through the many possibilities. You are slower than usual at both taking in and processing new advice, or old advice you previously ignored. For me, it has taken me years. But that level of time and effort is worth it so you can get to the other side. No one else can do it for you, unfortunately.

## Systematizing Advice

Once you begin to get enough advice, you need to be able to consider and sort it into some sort of comprehensive system. For the too-concrete advice, you need to be able to add context to give a bigger picture. For the too-abstract advice, you need to be able to break down the steps you might need to take in order for it to become realized. For advice that's in the wrong ballpark, you need to figure out what your basic problem is and do your best to pay attention to the kind of advice that at least begins to address your primary confusion and primary fears.

Because what you're really trying to do in this process is create an internal direction-finding machine, that takes in advice and spits out a meaningful direction that makes sense. Nothing too specific, because that would be weird, but also not too abstract, because that would be useless.
