# You Need Cognitive Tools and Emotional Skills

When you're feeling lost, you lose the clarity of thought and feeling necessary to find a path forward. Something happened that clobbered you and it makes you question not only what happened, but your previous understanding of the world and yourself. I found that I needed to pick up new ways of categorizing the world, and I had to begin to recalibrate my emotions. It was a long and painful process, but I had to get my mind right and I had to get my emotions right. In order to select a path forward, I had to be able to consider multiple possible priorities from multiple categories. But without abstractions, you can't categorize. And without emotions, you can't prioritize.

## Cognitive Tools

I can be a very fuzzy thinker. I'm more of a feeler, and typically I've tried to go through life sort of feeling my way through the world and not trusting systems or models because they always get something wrong, they always leave something out. But when I was feeling lost, I needed to find some clarity, and one way I found clarity was by picking up little conceptual frameworks. I had to give up some of my mistrust of abstractions.

The question then is what kinds of abstractions are going to be useful to you. The abstraction that you are going to most readily try to reach for, when you're feeling lost, is black and white thinking: either something is true or false, good or bad. It doesn't give you very many options. If you're going to get out of this rut you need to be able to divide the world into more slices than just two. And it's surprising how effective you can become just by being able to slice the world into four slices, or eight or 16 slices. Any more slices and a human's abiltiy to cognitively juggle that many categories at once gets too difficult. Now, this isn't science. Science is far more methodical and slow, but when you are lost, any little model of reality will help, even if it's not scientific.

Therefore you want to look for ways of looking at yourself and the world that contain 4 to 16 categories. This won't give you all the most specific answers. But it is a very effective tool to get you in the right ballpark. And that's what you need right now: to take one step in roughly the right direction. Books like Seven Habits of Highly Effective People understand how limited humans are and how we need advice in chunks that aren't too big and aren't too small. The Book of Five Rings. The Four Agreements. Six-Minute Abs. Or think of how many sermons have three main points. We need models, but our models have to be limited.

Over the years I've become a collector of small cognitive systems. After I'm done introducing these abstract recommendations, I will be reviewing a couple of the most interesting and effective cognitive models I've found.

## Emotional Skills

Almost no one teaches how to handle emotions in a systematic way. I needed a conceptual framework for emotions, almost a mathematical model in its rigor, of what emotions were. The world expects you to know how to handle your emotions. But it doesn't actually teach you how. You might find a course on anger management or listen to something on how to deal with your anxiety, but there's not a comprehensive approach to emotion and what it does for us as humans.

Emotion is actually a very hot scientific field right now, but it's in the earliest stages of connecting the basic physiology to what comes out as conscious feeling. Scientists aren't even in agreement of how many emotions there are and what they would consist of. But that's okay, because we can get a good idea of what emotions are for with some help. In future articles I will discuss specific skills, but I want to give an overview of what emotions are and what we will be aiming for:

At a super-basic level, emotions are programs. When our body or brain recognizes a particular type of situation, an emotional program gets executed. We can't even help it. It just happens. But how we respond to that emotion is where we can improve our skills. We don't want to over-express our emotions. That annoys people and doesn't really ever solve the problem. We don't want to ignore or repress our emotions, either. That creates other kinds of problems. We want to find a way to flow with our emotions, observing what they are trying to tell us about a particular situation, and glean the value judgments that are carried within our emotions.

## Using Abstractions and Emotions

Becoming more effective with the use of abstractions and emotional skills means you are refining your ability to accurately judge a situation, what is going on, and what you should do about it. You want enough options to not feel stuck, but you also don't want so many options that you feel overwhelmed. Refining this capability allows you to make the best decisions you can even in the face of limited information. Ideally you have a ton of information, a lot of time to consider that information, and your decision-making skills aren't strained because you have a full picture. But many times in life you don't have as much information as you want, and you still need to make good decisions.

In my previous article on [advice](advice.md), I discussed how you need to be able to create an internal direction-finding machine. The advice is the information that goes into the machine, and the abstract tools and emotions are the things that actually process that advice. From that processing you build up a store of proven abstract knowledge and concrete experiences that you can rely on and reference as you work to select a path forward.
