topics/essence_fear.md, before:

# The Essence of Fear

What is fear? What is it for? What is its purpose? What does it do for us? Unlike my [experience with anger](essence_anger.md), fear was something I knew much more intimately. It was my primary motivational emotion. But, similarly to my understanding of anger, I had never really considered those questions revolving around its true nature.

As with anger, my first consideration of fear began with Karla McLaren's [The Language of Emotions](https://www.amazon.com/Language-Emotions-What-Feelings-Trying/dp/1591797691). She begins her chapter on fear, saying that fear "brings you focus, instincts, and intuition" (235). Unlike anger, which brings us one thing, boundaries, fear brings us three things. It makes the task of finding the essence of fear more difficult, but perhaps there is a way to continue forward and search for the fundamental thing underlying these three things.

## Fear as Intuitive Action

Karla McLaren tries to further clarify what fear is by describing what it is not: "Most of us think we know fear because we have experienced the mood states of worry, anxiety, trepidation, terror, or panic. However, none of these emotions is fear!" (235-6). She goes on to say, "Fear is the intelligence that takes over our bodies, our minds, and our emotions, and turns us into surprisingly masterful lifesaves. In fact, in those times when we're sure we feel no fear, when we're completely focused, brilliantly instinctive, and amazingly resourceful, those are actually the times when our fear is flowing freely" (236). One of the interesting things she says about fear is that it is both intuitional and action-oriented. It combines perception and judgement at the same time, so you can act in the moment. "When your fear flows freely, you become competent, capable, and intelligent in every area of your life" (237).

Fear is intuitive action. It is knowing what to do and being able to do it. What's interesting here is that our felt, conscious feeling is not essential to fear. In fact, when we're aware of our fear, that's when it's not flowing freely. When we are consciously focused on the feeling, we are unable to receive new information, we are incapable of finding the right words, and we're paralyzed from acting intuitively.

Without a proper relationship to fear, we don't have access to the information we need in any given moment. Fear can stop us, but only to gather the correct information. "Fear stops you--not to immobilize you, but to give you the time you need to gather yourself and your resources" (241). Fear rises within us whenever we receive new information. "Remember that fear becomes activated when you encounter change" (240).

## Fear as a Generalized Capacity

The interesting move here is that it's a redefinition of fear into a more general capability. The information within fear is available in all kinds of situations, and it comes with varying degrees of intensity.  We're not using fear only when we are terrified of being eaten by zombies. It's a power within us that is always on and always available. Even when it's just a quiet sense within us. This generalization of fear allows one to really pay attention when you're actually using fear, and it puts normal use of fear into perspective, so you're not as afraid of fear.

What this understanding of fear has allowed me to do is be more tolerant of feeling low-intensity fear. I recognize I need to do something about that low emotional hum within me, so that it doesn't become stronger and eventually overwhelming. And being able to catch it early brings benefits: "When you can channel your fear properly, it will contribute a sense of self-preservation while it pushes you to study, prepare, and renew your understanding of courage as the capacity to live life on your own terms, rather than throw yourself headlong into fearless or daredevilish behaviors" (243). And this awareness of fear allows me to channel that energy into something creative.

## What Can Fear Create?

Okay. Now I want to layer another set of categories onto this view of fear as a more generalized capacity. If fear can be applied and deployed in different situations, what are the primary categories in which fear can manifest as something creative? One of the most effective tools I've discovered in my wanderings the past few years has been the Enneagram. It's especially helpful around the motivation of fear. Three of the numbers within the Enneagram are primarily motivated by fear. Types [five](https://www.enneagraminstitute.com/type-5), [six](https://www.enneagraminstitute.com/type-6), and [seven](https://www.enneagraminstitute.com/type-7) are each motivated by fear, but have different expressions of that motivation. When we're motivated by fear, we have three options in converting that fear into something creative. We can create knowledge, actions, or words.

## Creating Knowledge

For most of us, fear is to be avoided. But we all have different strategies and habits for avoiding fear. For the Enneagram Type Five, that strategy is to learn as much as one can about various topics so that one can be safe. To be safe, one has to see where the dangers lie, and construct a library of knowledge on how to avoid danger, and a set of tactics to get out of danger if one gets into a sticky situation.

## Acting Creatively

The Enneagram Type Six, rather than creating knowledge, uses fear to avoid decisions that could lead to danger. From a certain perspective, a kind of conservatism could creep in, but the Type Six, as they become so accustomed to living with fear, are able to actually discern which choices actually lead to danger, and act freely because they are prepared for the worst. Karla McLaren identifies the primary question that fear asks as, "What action should be taken?" Type Sixes are all about intuitive action.

## Speaking Creatively

The Enneagram Type Seven loves to avoid fear. They will go on endless adventures or talk incessantly to avoid focusing on the fear. But if they can stand a little fear they can become extremely good at finding the right words. This attention to the verbal world allows Sevens to be gregarious and fun-loving, always looking for the new thing to distract them.

## The Information Within Fear

As you can see, there are both positives and negatives to being able to create using the energy within fear. Fear is risky. But the goal is to have a healthy understanding and expression of fear so we can be more creative in a healthy way. Fear is a motivational energy that comes in many intensities and can be deployed in many situations to help you focus and pay attention to what you need to attend to. At its essence, fear is attention.

Copyright 2019 Steve Lewis All Rights Reserved

Commit message:

Remove unnecessary stuff around enneagram 5,6,7, and just focus on enneagram nine's relation to fear.

topics/essence_fear.md, after:

# The Essence of Fear

What is fear? What is it for? What is its purpose? What does it do for us? Unlike my [experience with anger](essence_anger.md), fear was something I knew much more intimately. It was my primary motivational emotion. But, similarly to my understanding of anger, I had never really considered those questions revolving around its true nature.

As with anger, my first consideration of fear began with Karla McLaren's [The Language of Emotions](https://www.amazon.com/Language-Emotions-What-Feelings-Trying/dp/1591797691). She begins her chapter on fear, saying that fear "brings you focus, instincts, and intuition" (235). Unlike anger, which brings us one thing, boundaries, fear brings us three things. It makes the task of finding the essence of fear more difficult, but perhaps there is a way to continue forward and search for the fundamental thing underlying these three things.

## Fear as Intuitive Action

Karla McLaren tries to further clarify what fear is by describing what it is not: "Most of us think we know fear because we have experienced the mood states of worry, anxiety, trepidation, terror, or panic. However, none of these emotions is fear!" (235-6). She goes on to say, "Fear is the intelligence that takes over our bodies, our minds, and our emotions, and turns us into surprisingly masterful lifesaves. In fact, in those times when we're sure we feel no fear, when we're completely focused, brilliantly instinctive, and amazingly resourceful, those are actually the times when our fear is flowing freely" (236). One of the interesting things she says about fear is that it is both intuitional and action-oriented. It combines perception and judgement at the same time, so you can act in the moment. "When your fear flows freely, you become competent, capable, and intelligent in every area of your life" (237).

Fear is intuitive action. It is knowing what to do and being able to do it. What's interesting here is that our felt, conscious feeling is not essential to fear. In fact, when we're aware of our fear, that's when it's not flowing freely. When we are consciously focused on the feeling, we are unable to receive new information, we are incapable of finding the right words, and we're paralyzed from acting intuitively.

Without a proper relationship to fear, we don't have access to the information we need in any given moment. Fear can stop us, but only to gather the correct information. "Fear stops you--not to immobilize you, but to give you the time you need to gather yourself and your resources" (241). Fear rises within us whenever we receive new information. "Remember that fear becomes activated when you encounter change" (240).

## Fear as a Generalized Capacity

The interesting move here is that it's a redefinition of fear into a more general capability. The information within fear is available in all kinds of situations, and it comes with varying degrees of intensity.  We're not using fear only when we are terrified of being eaten by zombies. It's a power within us that is always on and always available. Even when it's just a quiet sense within us. This generalization of fear allows one to really pay attention when you're actually using fear, and it puts normal use of fear into perspective, so you're not as afraid of fear.

What this understanding of fear has allowed me to do is be more tolerant of feeling low-intensity fear. I recognize I need to do something about that low emotional hum within me, so that it doesn't become stronger and eventually overwhelming. And being able to catch it early brings benefits: "When you can channel your fear properly, it will contribute a sense of self-preservation while it pushes you to study, prepare, and renew your understanding of courage as the capacity to live life on your own terms, rather than throw yourself headlong into fearless or daredevilish behaviors" (243). And this awareness of fear allows one to channel that energy into something creative.

## Fear and the Enneagram Nine

Learning I was an Enneagram Nine helped me to resolve a further part of the mystery involved in the emotion of fear. Nines, when they're unhealthy, since they suppress anger, tend to be very fear-based when motivated by others. Fear is like a special button to get an unhealthy Nine to do anything you want. Just make them afraid. And I found that true in my own life, at work and at home, and after that button-pushing event I would just feel terrible about myself.

Enneagram Nines, as they gain a connection to their inner anger, find that fear doesn't have such a stranglehold on their lives. They learn they can act without having to be more scared than is necessary, and they can focus on things that are realistic rather than possible dreaded outcomes.

## The Information Within Fear

Fear is risky. But the goal is to have a healthy understanding and expression of fear so we can be more creative in a healthy way. Fear is a motivational energy that comes in many intensities and can be deployed in many situations to help you focus and pay attention to what you need to attend to.

Copyright 2019 Steve Lewis All Rights Reserved
